A cheap and secure last-mile Internet connectivity technology that provides basic email and web site access to any person anywhere, regardless of telecommunications infrastructure. The 'sneakernet' is a digital communication network made up of portable storage devices such as USB thumb drives and camera memory cards, driven by software running on hand-held computing devices such as mobile phones, PDAs, portable game devices, digital cameras, and portable computers. The sneakernet can piggy-back data over existing trade and supply routes, bringing email and web access to any location that is habitable by humans.

Previous sneakernets have been simple point-to-point connections. Our sneakernet design uses a routing protocol that allows many-to-one connections between many end users and a single Internet access point. It allows messages to travel along the shortest possible transmission path through a cluster of interconnected couriers who overlap, and relay messages as they follow irregular and unpredictable paths. Software handles our routing protocol automatically so that users and couriers do not have to do any special route planning, they simply walk around normally and they 'gossip' when they meet. The messages flowing over the sneakernet are encrypted, and couriers and eavesdroppers can't read them. A data relay server accesses email and web pages from the Internet and then dispatches them through the sneakernet to the specific end users who have requested them, and sends email for them by proxy.

Depending on the distances involved and the number and activity level of couriers, users may experience latency ranging from hours to days, weeks or months. Couriers could easily bring new email deliveries several times a day to users in densely populated areas like Haiti, whereas a village that lies hundreds of miles up a river in a rain forest in Brazil may only see one email delivery every week as traders visit the area with goods. If they live four trade stops up the river then it could take a month for an email to reach them, but their messages will find them automatically. Providing sneakernet Internet access will likely become a commercial industry in some areas. Even though the messages and web pages have to be carried by hand and may take days, and even though they may be passed off by relay between several different couriers along the way, the information will eventually arrive. It isn't quite the instant email experience that users would expect in New York City, but sending and receiving delayed email using a mobile phone is infinitely better than not being able to send and receive email at all.






